First, would you discuss your academic training
and how you became attracted to oceanography? Oh,
yeah. I went to Allegheny College in Meadville,
Pennsylvania. Does the level look all right? Yes,
the level looks fine.
And I always thought I wanted to be a physicist so I
wouldn't have to deal with many people. It seemed
to make a great idea. I remember telling a friend of
mine I was working with once, that's why I was going
to be a physicist. Then I worked for, after school I
took a job with Magnaflux, which is a magnetic
inspection system. The fellow was an alumni from
the school. He happened to be back the June I was
graduating. He offered me a job, and so I took it. It
would be an hour, hour and a half. And so I got a job.
They weren't too easy to find them. So I worked for
Magnaflux for about two years. And I was thinking
about going back to school. I got married, and this
is 1940, and I got married in 1941. In fact, I went
off to graduate school in I got offered an
assistantship, and then I felt I just wouldn't be
able to survive with all the social and emotional
problems, wanting to get married and getting $30 a
month for being a graduate assistant and so on. I
went back to work for Magnaflux. I stayed with them
for two years, and by then the war had started, and I
was going to join the Army, and they told me I should
take this job at Lockheed. expecting overseas. I
went over and worked in Ireland for a year at an Air
Force base repairing airplanes. And I came back
in, I went into the Army, and then I got into the Navy
and got out in 1946.
And we had lived in Chicago, in a very nice place to
live, north of Chicago, Glenview. I know you
probably don't know that. It was a very
comfortable, nice little log cabin out in the
country. So we moved back there after the war, and I
went over to Northwestern, and I with a GI Bill
applied and got in the physics department. So I
spent two years there. And while I was there, Sam
Goudsmit was there. He was a fairly famous
physicist. I started doing my thesis work under
him. And then he moved to Brookhaven. And I moved to
Brookhaven in 1948 with him and finished my thesis
there and started working on another thing and got
my degree in 1949. I stayed at Brookhaven two
years, working on the time-of-flight mass
spectrometer. And I'd always wanted to teach, so
we left Brookhaven and went to the University of
Toledo, where I taught in the physics department
for six years. And during those summers, the first
summer we stayed in Toledo, and the next two
summers we went down to Los Alamos to work for the
summer. And the next summer, which is 1955, asked
me to come back to Brookhaven for the summer. So I
went back there and was working with him. And this
is how I got into oceanography, basically. It's a
sort of interesting story. I was crossing a field,
and a fellow was working. The guy that does
neutrino experiments was working on his
equipment, and I went over to help him. He was
having sort of a bad day, and he said, we ought to go
to a place like Woods Hole. And where you have fun.
There's a lot of interesting problems. And you get
out and you sail around and see the world. Really
nice. And I said, gee, that's a great idea. Went
back to work. Then we went back to Toledo. And the
first physics of the day I picked up when I got home
had an advertisement in it from Woods Hole asking
about physicists. So I wrote this fellow a letter
saying, why don't you write too, and I'll write,
and we'll see what happens. And I wrote, and he
didn't. So we came the next summer in 1956 to Woods
Hole, worked the summer. Once we were on the Cape
for a summer, why, we were hooked. Convinced then
oceanography was for you? We were convinced
oceanography was for us. So really your Navy
experience didn't have anything to do with it?
Very little, no. Nothing at all, really. My Navy
experience had very little to do with ships. It was
an anti-submarine weapon, classified thing. You
know, it was... Like most of the Navy, it doesn't
have much to do with the ocean. It's an
inconvenience. But a lot of oceanographers came
to that, and he said, right? Oh, yes, right. Well, a
lot of the people in the acoustics work, of course,
were associated with the Navy, and it's sort of a
natural thing to gravitate to, in a way. When I came
here, I thought I was really interested in doing
some tracer experiments, using radioactive
stuff, and so on. I went to work for Brackett.
Hersey, and he was in acoustics, and so I started
doing acoustics, and I've been there ever since.
It's just that simple. And I assume that when you
were at Los Alamos, you were doing primarily
nuclear energy measurements, right? Okay. So
it's really almost as if you're transferring
fields to go into acoustics. Yeah, really. What
was your reaction then to acoustics? How did you
choose it? Well, it was the thing to do when we were
here. That was the That was a big thing. I came to
work for Brackett, and that's what he was doing. So
that's what I started doing. And I just never shook
loose. There was a lot of other interesting things
to do. Eventually, then, I got, while I was working
for Brackett,
we got involved with the Illuminat between Woods
Hole
The Navy and Reynolds Metals. Reynolds Metals was
building a submarine called the Illuminat. The
Navy wanted to get in somebody into the deep diving
business. And it looked like by giving us the
money, we could charter the, make a deal with
Reynolds to run the Illuminat. And we were looking
for somebody to sort of run that program. So I left
acoustics at that time and took over that program.
and due to some problem in making a negotiation,
why we didn't do business with Reynolds. Instead,
we got money from the Navy and built the Alvin. So
from 1961, approximately, until 1966, one of my
major concerns was Alvin, getting it rented, the
whole problem there. In 1962, we formed
departments. And I became department chairman of
applied oceanography.
So that was a break with the acoustics. But then in
66, about 65 or 66, Hersey had become department
chairman of geology and geophysics. And the
acoustics had stayed in there. And in that time,
when he left, I was sort of the logical one to take
over that department. So I became chairman of
geology and geophysics And I did that until 1969.
And I kept the applied oceanography for a year, and
then Scott Dobbin came here, took over applied
oceanography, and then changed the name to Ocean
Engineering. So this is sort of the department I
had back in the early 60s, basically. From 69 to 71,
I went to La Spezia and was deputy director over
there for two years, admittedly. But when I came
back, Scott Dobbin was leaving, so I became
chairman of the ocean engineering department.
Jim Hertzler had taken on the department
chairmanship of geology and geophysics, and I
went to Las Vegas. So it was all pretty simple.
Okay. Well, let's sort of follow in order. The new
field, acoustics. Okay. What sort of
experimentation were you involved in, and was
this the first time you'd gone out to sea for any
length of time? Yeah, really. I'd been on a ship.
I'd ridden a ship when I was in the Navy in some
places, but nothing. It's different. You're
almost a passenger, unless you're on the decan or
something. I was always a passenger, basically,
because of the work we did. So this is the first
experiment in going to sea, right? There wasn't
any major upheaval. I mean, I guess acoustics is
physics. Physics works. It's interesting and
complicated, but there wasn't anything. There
was a lot to learn, of course, because of the
details and all of the problems and the
approximations and where things work and where
they don't work and why they do that. You just have
to learn that type of thing. There wasn't anything
fundamentally different from doing a lot of other
things in a way. Do you feel that to be a good
oceanographer, you have to go to sea? No, don't
believe that at all. Jules Verne was a pretty good
oceanographer, I think. I don't think he ever left
a four or five block area to perish, as far as I know.
Well, I just wonder, because more and more, at
least people in physics and oceanography go to sea
less and less. Yeah, well, that's true. But then I
think the world of oceanography is becoming more
and more quantitative. Analysis problems are
getting much more important in the thing and not so
much the exploration. When people first went to
see, they were just finding out what was there. And
I assume your first acoustical work was really
just finding out what was there? No, the first one,
they had a pretty good program. We got involved in
some propagation work, which is you make noises
and listen some distance away, and you see how the
sound is propagated through the water, and try to
understand why it behaves the way it does. People
are still doing the same experiment, basically.
Different frequencies, different scales, and
different places. Who worked on this early
acoustical work besides yourself? Oh, well, this
wasn't really early. This was in the 1957, don't
forget. Oh, Percy, Alan Vine, Bud Knott, the local
group here, Betty Bunce, Henry Johnson, Dick
Backus. We ran sort of a sideshow in some of the
things. We got on cruises, and we'd do propagation
work. Echo sounding was not very, it was just
getting into its own at that time, and just knowing
what the shape of the bottom light was. It's
beginning to be recognized as being more and more
important and easier to do. Started to do seismic
profiling, which is a echo sounding where you look
into the bottom to see what the layers are like.
This is the big tool that the oil companies use now
all the time. Bracket. But not for two of the people
who put this into sort of a routine production
mode, you might say. It's become a great big thing
with the oil companies now, of course. They've far
surpassed what we do, just because they have so
much more money to spend on equipment. And we
worked with people from Daystrom. We worked with
people from NRL, from New London. We went out and
looked at submarines. You know, one of the
problems you are is looking at echos from
submarines. How far can you see them?
Any problem? No problem at all. I just want to check
and make sure we don't have any. Okay. And then we
worked on propagation. We did some ambient noise.
We did some bottom reflectivity.
Did a lot of volume reverberation with Dick
Backus. This is looking at the scattering back
from little creatures in the sea. A lot of these
problems are still being worked on. What's
happened is the Technology's changed so much. You
can do a lot more now easier than you could before.
The ideas haven't changed very much. This is one of
the interesting things that happens in most
science, oceanography in particular. If you look
at acoustics particularly, if you look back in the
early literature, you can see statements about
doing things that they just couldn't do because
they didn't have the technical capability that we
do routinely now. It's really very deep. Yeah, and
this is happening in all fields, of course. Do you
attribute this portion to a fallout from space
technology? Oh, it would have happened whether
space technology was there or not, I think.
Because it accelerated some of the problems, I
think. But I think the big things have been
development of the computer and the solid state
equipment It's just made everything better. And
I'm sure that would have happened anyhow. I think
the people weren't really worried about that in
the Bell Labs when they developed the first
transistors. That's just put more money into it,
really. So you would judge, at least in your
experience in oceanography, the computer and
transistor to be the most important technical
advances, or would you choose others? Well, I
think they are the most important technical
advances. Well, everybody's biased because of
the particular thing he does. Sure. If somebody
wanted to measure, well, even the people who
measure currents would probably tend to agree
with that. Because you can build little things you
can put out there that last a long time, use very
little power, and store a lot of information.
That's the problem in a lot of these measurements.
I think that's reasonable. Now, after doing
acoustical work for really the first several
years, what made you change to underwater
technology? Well, it just sounded like it might be
fun. Okay. Simple enough. Yeah, we were going to
get this deep submersible, and nobody really,
well, they had these bathyscaps, which were quite
immobile, you know, They can get down deep, but
they can't move around much. It just seemed like
it'd be a nifty thing to do, to be able to build
something that could get down and you could go
around and look at things and take pictures and so
on. It turned out to be very successful, actually.
Although at first you received some criticism.
Well, it always does. Well, when they came to you
with the idea, what was your first reaction? Which
idea? The idea of the submersible. Well, we were
already, Woods Hole was, already somewhat
committed to this line. We were trying to
negotiate this thing with Reynolds and through
the Navy. And I just happened to be talking to Bill
Rainey one day about it. And he asked me if I'd be
interested. You see, he came to be basically a
pilot and one of the chief engineers on it. We
wanted somebody else to sort of head up the whole
thing and do more of the interaction with other
people and so on. So he asked me if I'd be
interested. about it and said, yeah, sounds like
an interesting thing to do. I stayed active in some
of the acoustics work during that time. I went on
quite a few different cruises that had nothing to
do with the submarine. But my major effort was on
the submarine during that time for about four or
five years. That was my number one worry, I guess,
is the best way to say it. Was the number one worry
attached to it in designing it or in raising money
for it or what? Just the mechanics of getting the
thing designed, built, operating. You know,
there are a lot of unknowns in those things. You get
a lot of
critics or people who worry about different
things. A lot of them are justified, and each one
they worry about, you have to look at and see
whether it's real or not real. Answer the
question, go or no go, one way or the other. It
turned out that the hull, before we built the
hulls, nobody had built hulls like that. The hulls
for the Bathurst calves are really overdone.
Well, we were really worried about weight, and we
were trying to get down to reasonable thickness
and yet still have a good safety factor. Well, we
had much discussion about the hulls and the design
and the shape they were going to be and all this
business. Finally built them, and they turned out
to be much better than anybody. The tests on them
showed they were much better than anybody had
designed, thought they were going to be, which was
sort of nice. And there were just a whole host of
problems like that. And then you have the
administrative. I mean, the company building
them had underestimated the cost, which is not
unusual. And part of it was certainly legitimate
and honest. And part of it just wasn't good
management. And when you run a business like this,
you have to be a little bit hard-nosed. You just
can't give them everything that they want because
they think they didn't make money or lost money on
deals. You have to run it as a business as well as a
science. So that took quite a bit of time. And
different ideas about things. And then, of
course, there's the first time you start testing
it, first time you put people down and they go deep.
You have a lot of worries. And we lowered it down on a
big string down to 6,000 feet before we put anybody
in it to go down that far. And that was a very
interesting week we did that. had a million
dollars hanging on the end of the string down
there. Okay. In terms of design, first, and
problems with design, except for the thickness of
the hull, what seemed to be your next major
problem? What were you concerned about most in
terms
of design? Well, it's the whole host of, not minor
things, but a whole host of things we'd never done
before. We wanted batteries, and we wanted to be
able to drop the batteries in case a submarine gets
hung up somewhere. Why do you want to be able to drop
the batteries? Submarine gets lighter, and then
it'll come to the surface. And this took quite a
bit, getting a decent package for the batteries.
We decided to use lead acid batteries, because
even though they're not the most efficient, it
turns out they're not too bad, and they're fairly
economical. We didn't have the least clue as to
whether we were going to have to drop one set of
these every month or every four months. We've
never dropped a set yet, it turns out. And another
problem we worried about was building the thing so
that the whole sphere, the part with the people in
it, could be released from the rest of it in case the
rest of it got tangled up. Then you hang up, and you
can unhook the sphere, and the people come to the
top, even with only half the submarine. And
getting that thing designed and so it worked right
took a lot of problems, because it's under high
stress, the release mechanism. And the first one
we built galled a little bit. So it was just, again,
stainless steel on stainless steel. So we had to
change that. Every one of those steps. You find out
about it, and then you have to change it. It's an
agony. Who consulted with you on the design and the
design problems? Well, we had a fellow, Bud
Froelich, who really originated the design out
in, he was working for General Mills at the time.
And he was, the people there were very good. The
engineering group there were really quite good on
it, worked hard, did a good job. And we talked, of
course, we were being, Because we were spending
Navy money, we were being monitored by the Navy all
the time. We consulted with them, and then we had a
different set of relations with different groups
in the Navy, some very encouraging and some a
little discouraging. We had minor flare-ups with
different people who thought this just wouldn't
work this way or something like that. No big deals,
but each one good for a week or so. Did your money,
did they become O&R? Yeah, O&R, right. A fellow
named Swede Momsen, who was the son of the Momsen
and the Momsen Lung. He really pushed the thing,
couldn't he? Really good. That way was fine. But
the motors, the drive motors were a problem
because they had to run in oil. You know, down at
these pressures and everything has to be pressure
correlated and then we had the You have to be able to
change the, essentially change the volume of the
submarine so you stay neutral when you're
floating down there. That was rather
interesting. That worked fine. We've since
changed that system. We now have a, we've pumped
saltwater, seawater in and out of some spheres now
in the album the way she is now. Well, the biggest
problem was a little one with the, When we made the
first 6,000-foot test, we had trouble with the
main propulsion in the steering motors. And this
cost us about three months of work before we found
out what the problem was. You get down and dive, and
you get down to 2,000 or 3,000 feet. And sometimes
these things would want to stay running, even
though you turned them off, or else they wouldn't
run when you turned them on. And eventually, we
found that some contacts They're opening up in
oil. You see, all the electrical system was in oil.
So the relays were in oil, and they'd open up. And
when they did this, they're opening up and pulling
an arc and forming little carbon granules in
between the relay points. Then this would either
hold it open or partially short it out, and that's
causing the problem. So all we did was turn them
this way, so when they made those carbons, they
dropped down to the bottom, and that solved the
problem. That took us a long time. Then we lost
Alvin one time down off Bermuda, and we had a fairly
rudimentary navigation system. We could ping on
them, and we could tell how far away they were from
us by acoustics, but we didn't know which
direction they really were. But when we were
working on a slope, they would just tell us the
depth of water where they were on. That drew a line
for us, and then knowing how far away they were from
us, knowing where we were, we could draw a line to
tell us where they were. And we went in. We were out
there, and we were just finishing a dive, and they
were coming up. We got a measurement on them, and
then we had to make up our mind whether we went this
way or this way. And you change the range, and you
know whether you're going the right way or not. We
went this way, and the range got longer. So we went
back this way, and we never heard them again. By
that time, they'd come up through the water, and we
couldn't hear them. And we didn't know where the
heck they were. So we spent about eight or 10 hours
before we finally found them. They shot some
flares up. We got the Coast Guard planes that came
out from Bermuda to start looking. They waited
until it really got dark, and then they shot some
flares up. And we saw them and went over and picked
them up. And that was interesting. I bet it was. I
bet it was interesting for them, too, by the way.
Yeah, right. Yeah, they could see the lights of
Bermuda and nothing else. We had trouble with the
radio, though. The other thing that screwed us up
there, antenna on their radio developed a crack,
and it shorted it out, so they couldn't transmit
back to us. And we were calling them, and they
couldn't, they could just barely hear us calling
them, but they couldn't get back on the air to tell
us anything. So that was just another interesting
day.
We built, the mothership was an interesting,
difficult problem to solve. We built Lulu
eventually. We really didn't know what to do about
Mothership, because nobody had really been
handling the submarine this big before. And we
found out that there were two of these big hulls
down at New London. They'd been used in some mine
towing, mine warfare experiments that were
available. And they were about 100 feet long,
elliptical shape, 9 feet high, and 14 feet wide,
each hull. And we could get those, so we decided
we'd build them. catamaran the way we do Lulu now
there's a picture of it right there the way we do
Alvin you see we pull her in between those two hulls
then we have an elevator that's underneath her and
picks her up so you can work on her so we designed
that ship and built it and it was put together down
here at the town dock as a matter of fact it was
pretty casual in a good manner it's still working
it's sitting out it's right out at the end of the
dock today as a matter of fact It's been modified.
It's changed. It looks different than it did in
that picture. Somewhat now, it's got some bows on
it and so on. But it's still basically the same
halls that we put on.
And the first year, we were very, it looked like a
disaster. We didn't have the bridge or anything.
We just had a, you know, we were just feeling our way
along, playing it cool. So we got it running, and
it's run quite well ever since, actually. When I
became chairman of the geology and geophysics
department, I gave up Alvin, and Scott Dobbin
became its father, because it stayed in the
applied oceanography department. Then I got it
back again when I came back in 1971. That's
been a lot of fun. Was there anything in the first
series of tests you ran up on Alvin beside the
flexibility of the hull which surprised you, or
the strength of the hull? Not really. You didn't
anticipate it all in turn? Everything seemed to be
pretty well. It ran about the way we thought it
would. Well, you know, a lot of engineering went
into it. Bill Rainey was very important in it. Jim
Maverick, everybody worked really hard on it.
Arnold Chart. We had a lot of people working on it.
Where did the oven go on its first voyage? Our first
really working voyage, we went over and found the
bomb in Palomares. That was the first time we ever,
well, that's almost true. We tried to do some work
off Bermuda the year before, but we didn't have
that one problem 100% solved. So we came back. We
felt we'd solved the problem in Palomares. guess
it was 65, finally, when we were at Bermuda, and we
came home, and we tore it down and looked at
everything, and we were just putting it back
together when the bomb happened. So that was the
real first test of being, you know, thinking we
were an operational submarine. And that was just
hard work.
What do you think has been the Alvin's
contribution to, let's say, applied
oceanography? Well, I've applied oceanography.
I don't think it's done a great deal. It's done a lot
more in geology, geophysics, and biology. We've
done a few tasks, mostly for the Navy, that are
applied tasks, going finding some things they've
lost or looking at certain things for them. That's
been a chore, a job, and it hasn't been really very
exciting. I think the things they've done in the
Mid-Atlantic Ridge, the famous work, anywhere
along where they've gotten down into these
canyons and really got much more of a feel for what
the bottom of the ocean is like in a coherent
manner. Even with photographs, it's difficult.
Photographic technique has evolved very nicely
in the last ten years. But to get down there and be
able to look at the bottom and then selectively
sample and see how the things relate to each other
really tells you a lot more about the bottom than
people ever knew before. The stuff they did in
Famous has really been very interesting in terms
of seafloor spreading and things like that.
That's been the big thing. In biology, they've
learned quite a bit. They've been able to do some
experiments on the bottom that they weren't able
to do before. And of course, set up a whole new
venture of research for some people here, Holger
Janisch, and looking at sort of the biological
slowdown, the bacterial slowdown in depth. When
Alvin was dropped
in 68, I guess it was, she went to the bottom because
a couple of cables broke. There were no people
there, fortunately. And she stayed down there for
nine months before she was recovered. And the
sandwiches and apples that were in there looked
very much like new sandwiches and apples when they
came back up. There'd been very little bacteria
action. So Holger Janischer has been really
looking at that problem to a large extent as part of
his work ever since. He's finding out some very
interesting things.